[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Springtime in Melbourne,
the chance of frost is pretty
minimal now.
We're in the first
week of October.
If you haven't
already done so, now's
the time to start planning
your veggie garden.
So the first crops we
start for in spring
are basically, your chards, your
silver beet, beetroot, beans,
peas, onions, lettuce.
All of that sort of
stuff can be concentrated
on your first few
weeks of spring.
The reason why
these are all so big
is they were left to overwinter
so that we always had
some greens during the winter.
Some perpetual perennial spinach
there and the rainbow chard.
And the new crops
go in behind it.
So that when these are
finished the end of summer,
the second half will be right to
overwinter for the next season.
So here we have our kale bed.
We've grown a couple of quite
rare varieties this year.
We're just trialing a couple.
This one's a kale yard
kale from Scotland.
It's an extremely
old heirloom variety.
And this one here's
from Britain, also.
It's a sea kale.
And this one grows
wild along the coast.
And, in fact, this one
would have sustained
the ancient Romans and Greeks.
It's a very, very old variety.
And this one here is your
Tuscan kale, your black kale,
which is a common one.
So kales can be put in
any time of the year.
And again, I would normally
have a bed that I overwinter.
That hasn't been done this
year because I needed the space
and I had redone them.
But there's no real need to
overwinter it because kale,
you can plant in
succession all year.
So this is our new
crop of rainbow chard.
And it's a green
leafy vegetable.
So all the green
leafy vegetables,
we're eating the leaves.
But when we're talking about
tomatoes, cucumbers, pumpkins,
capsicums, eggplants, they
are a fruit that forms
and they need
pollination from bees.
So every few beds, I plant
some sort of flowers or herbs
that attract bees.
This is a borage so the
young leaves can be eaten.
And especially, the dark blue
flowers are great in salad.
But the bees
absolutely love them.
So every few beds,
put one in the middle.
So why organic?
Because this is produce
fresh as nature intended.
You can't walk into a
supermarket and do that.
Because your produce
is sprayed and treated
with hundreds of chemicals that
are on the accepted chemical
list.
That are OK today, but
when we start finding out
the ill effects of what it does
to our body in 20 years time,
they'll be on the banned list.
That's what happened
with things like DDT
and other very dangerous
chemicals that are now
banned and now, cancerous.
We lose several chemicals
a year off the list
that we were allowed to use and
now we're not allowed to use.
So the chemicals
they're using today,
which are accepted today, are
on the banned list in 10 years
time.
Do we actually know what
we're putting into our bodies?
We haven't got a clue.
Because they don't have
to disclose everything
that goes onto these
fruits and vegetables.
Why is that a problem?
Because you feed these
unknown substances
into your family,
yourself, your children.
And your children are
not responsible for what
they're fed, you are.
So we have a responsibility
to our families,
to our health about the things
that we put into our bodies.
And with all the chemicals
that are accepted
to be used in standard farming
practices, if you buy organic,
they're not accepted.
There is a reason for that.
It's because there are
no good chemicals that
are used in plant production.
They are all dangerous because
they're used to kill insects,
to kill bacterias.
And what the system says
that in small quantities,
that it's OK for
human consumption.
So if they tested this rainbow
chard from a supermarket
and said it had so many parts
per million of an accepted
chemical so that's
not dangerous,
what happens when you
are eating that 365 days
of the year for 40 years?
Suddenly, you have a problem
because they don't take that
into consideration.
What happens is that these
things build up in your system,
just like heavy metals
do like mercury.
Toxins build up in your tissues,
your fat cells, your liver.
And what happens
is you're not going
to see any detrimental
effects from one meal
or even from six
months of eating it.
But over 40 years, we start to
see the effects of ingesting
dangerous chemicals.
We don't need to do that.
Buy organic produce.
Australia has one of the
best systems of maintaining
organic certification.
So people have to pass
their certification
on a regular basis.
If they're found to
have used something
that isn't acceptable
in the test,
they're taken off the list.
So buy organic produce.
Your supermarkets are
starting to get more of it
now because it's
a case of demand.
And the more you demand
it, the more they'll stock.
The more it becomes available
and the cheaper it will become.
Buy organic, it's
better for you.
It's better for the planet.
So let's have a look at
an example of seedlings.
These are lettuce.
These around about
two weeks old.
And we do ours in
individual peat pots.
It's a little bit
more expensive,
but the reason we do it is
because we avoid the transplant
shock.
As you can see, the roots
all form on the outside.
There's no need to take
the part off the outside.
You just dig a hole,
plant it at soil level.
And the plants take off as
if they were planted directly
into the ground.
So there's no setback
or shock, whatsoever.
So with these, we plant
three or four seeds.
As soon as the
strongest one comes up,
we cull out the others,
we thin them out.
And just grow on the
strongest seedling.
So this is lettuce.
We do many other types
different times of the year.
We're doing these
now, it's autumn.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And we'll just have
a quick look at how
we prepare these little pots.
So the product we use for the
base of our seed raising mix
and for all the sprouting, the
wheat grass and the sprouts,
is coconut coir-peat, which
is the leftover product
of the coconut industry.
The outside of the
coconuts are ground up
into a peat-like substance.
It has no peat moss in it, but
it's called coconut coir-peat.
Now, the thing you've
got to remember
is that because
we're organic, you
have to make sure that there
isn't any synthetic fertilizer
in the product when you buy it.
So this one has no
fertilizer added.
So basically, it
just needs a soak.
Now, the way we get around
the fertilizer issue,
you don't need to add fertilizer
because as far as growing
on your sprouts or starting
off your seedlings,
a seed has enough energy
inside it to get them going.
But if you're going to grow
them on for any period of time,
a little bit of
fertilizer is good.
So because this has
none, we pop that
in a bucket that's big enough
to handle it when it expands.
Now, a brick that size takes
4 and 1/2 liters of water.
So we're using the sea salt
with seaweed concentrate.
It is certified organic.
So we just use the
required amount.
And we just mix that in.
Now this will just soak.
It only needs two, three hours.
We leave it overnight.
We pop that in and you
end up with about 9 liters
of coconut coir-peat.
And here's what it looks
like after it's been soaking
about four or five hours.
So it's very loose, soft.
And we would use this to plant
our sprouts on or our wheat
straight onto this.
Or in the case of
our seedlings, we
use this as 50% of
our seed raising mix.
And we'll show you
how we mix that up.
For our seed raising mix, we
start with our own compost.
But you could use a seed raising
mix, preferably an organic one.
And we give that
a couple of sieves
to get out all the big material.
After our first sieve, we'll
give that a second sieve.
And we just use a lighter
finer grade sieve.
It's a little time consuming,
but it's well worth the effort.
So what we end up with is a
very fine rich compost material.
And then we add
50% of this and 50%
with our coconut coir-peat moss.
And we end up with this,
this is our finished product.
It's very light.
It retains moisture
extremely well.
And it's very easy
for the seedlings
to push up without compacting.
And we've found that to be the
most successful seed raising
formula.
So the process of
starting off the seedlings
is we've got our premium
quality seed raising mix.
We start off with our
55 mil little peat pots.
These come in a packet, you
can just buy these at Bunnings.
And you buy the trays
that they fit in.
I put them in a solid base tray.
So if you fill
that up with water,
they take it up from the base.
You don't have to try and water
your seedlings from the top
and wash off the
soil, which makes it
difficult for very fine seeds.
Now, the thing with
these is, though, I
haven't been able to
find them at Bunnings
so I buy mine just
online on the internet.
I think these ones
came off eBay.
So you're just after
a solid base tray.
And the 55 mill trays
come from Bunnings.
We just pop these in.
We'll just do a
few just to show.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So you pop those in there.
Just grab a handful.
Just run it over the top.
I'll just push it down
lightly with two fingers.
And then, one more
run over the top.
And basically, that's it.
You plant your seeds
directly into that.
Fill up the base with water.
Pop it in.
It soaks up the water,
it soaks the pot.
And you get the adequate
amount of moisture in there.
And it's the easiest way to
keep them continually moist,
just keep topping the
base up with water.
It's also how we fertilize
ours by mixing the seaweed
concentrate and just pouring
it into there, as well.
And they just take
up what they need.
I'll show you the process
of how we grow wheat grass,
but the process for wheat grass
and growing sprouts on a medium
is the same.
What we use for our wheat
grass is a milling wheat,
a certified organic
milling wheat.
So one important point
about the wheat that you use
is that it must be fresh.
So if you just go
to your cupboard
and get some wheat out,
you might get a 30%, 50%
germination rate.
But if you buy
fresh wheat, you'll
get 100% germination rate.
It'll come up nice and quickly.
And it won't yellow
off and you'll
get a beautiful healthy growth.
So make sure that you're
always buying fresh wheat.
The process that we go
through, a lot of people
would say why do you
bother growing wheat
grass on a medium at all?
Because you can just soak
it and put it on some paper
towel and grow.
Well, you can.
But the problem is
that's not organic.
When you've got a
paper towel, it's
been bleached in chemicals.
And when you place
the seed on there
and it takes up those
chemicals, you're
consuming those chemicals.
And that's not organic.
And it's not a wise thing to do
since you're taking the wheat
grass for health.
Because it just concentrates
all those chemicals.
If you took a piece of paper
towel and squeezed it out,
you'd have this liquid with the
chemicals and the bleach in it.
You wouldn't drink that.
But that's exactly
what you're going
to do if you're going to
grow wheat grass on it.
So we're growing it on a
completely safe medium.
It just gives the roots
something to get into.
Because wheat grass,
you get two crops.
Once you've had your wheat
grass come up, you crop it off.
And you'll get a
second crop off it.
Now, we'll just show you
we use 1 cup of wheat.
I use a sieve and a bowl
that the sieve will fit into.
So it's easy to
take it in and out.
And you can run that
under water, if you want.
I don't think there's any need.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Basically, just fill that up.
Make sure all the
grains of wheat are wet.
And then, we just
soak that overnight.
Now, here's one that
we soaked overnight.
You can see the difference.
The grains have all swollen up.
They've taken up all the water
they're going to take up.
If you leave it much
longer than that,
there's a chance that
they'll stop fermenting.
Now we'll show you the
medium that we grow it on.
And we're back to our
coconut coir-peat.
This doesn't have any
soil in it at all,
it's just the coconut coir-peat.
And soaked in that mild
solution of sea soil, which
is organic seaweed fertilizer.
We basically just give
that a thin coating, just
flatten it out.
I usually use a piece of
wood just to flatten it out,
but it's not that necessary.
We tip that over the top.
Just spread it out.
Doesn't have to
be done precisely,
just give it an even coat.
And what happens is that the
roots come through the bottom.
And if there's a well
of water in here,
that's basically enough for
two, three days, four days.
It just pops in
there, it soaks it up.
And you don't have the problem
of continually having to spray
it two or three times a day.
So that'll save you
with all the watering.
And then we just give that
a fine mist of water with a
rose spray.
Pop it into a dark cupboard.
Some people place a sheet
of paper or cardboard
over the top.
And when the sprouts lift the
paper or the cardboard up,
they to bring it
out into the light.
I just put it in
a dark cupboard,
basically, for about
two or three days.
And then we get our
first stage of shooting
and that's approximately
at day three.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And that's one day.
The difference that one
day makes as soon as you
take it out into the sun.
You can do this in your kitchen.
Filtered sunlight,
not direct sunlight
because it dries it
out far too quickly.
So that's day four.
And growing very healthy.
We're going to plant
some early potatoes.
These ones are an
Australian variety
called Toolangi Delight,
a purple variety,
are great for using
as new potatoes early.
So we're just going to
show you a few tools that
make it easy planting in
any sort of vegetable bed.
Most people after just get used
to it, you don't really worry.
But to start off
with, there are things
you can use like plum
lines of some sort
to keep your rows straight.
So you just keep moving
those at the same distance
and everything's
all nice and square.
Otherwise, you can
end up with something
that looks rather hieldy by
the time you get to the end.
And you can cut sticks
or pieces of chew
with the length written on it.
When you know when
you grow so many
different things
and you know what
the spacing is, like the
potatoes, 40 centimeter.
So you mark where
your first one is.
You can use little markers,
just go one there, one there,
and one there.
And you can do that
all the way down
the bed, 40 centimeters apart.
So there starts the
next one, there.
And then, it's completely
uniform all the way down.
So all you do is you
just dig your hole.
And just a handful
of organic fertilizer
mixed in the bottom of the hole.
These potatoes are
being chitted already,
which means they're
left out in the light.
Not in the direct sun, but just
in the light for a month or so,
so their eyes start to develop.
And you put the strongest
ones to the top.
Now just the point,
I'm not going
to bother knocking any of
these shoots off, the chits.
A lot of people knock
them all off and just
leave the strongest one.
And that means you'll
get fewer potatoes,
but you'll get much
bigger potatoes.
So every branch that comes up
here will grow potatoes off it.
But the more that
the one plant has
the support the more growth,
the smaller the potatoes.
So it's just choice.
So we just cover that in.
You always should be buying
certified seed potatoes, which
means they're certified
to be disease-free.
By just growing the
same potatoes out
of the same patch
year after year,
you can get disease
in your plants, which
then becomes part of your soil.
And that's why it's crucial to
rotate your beds every year.
So if you buy certified
seed potatoes,
don't use the ones
from the supermarkets.
And the reason why is
because in the old days,
you used to leave them in
the cupboard and they all
used to shoot.
Now, it's difficult to get
them to shoot and when they do,
it takes them a lot longer than
what the organic potatoes do.
The reason being is because
the potatoes that you're
buying in the stores are all
sprayed with a growth retardant
to stop the shoots
from coming in.
They're either
sprayed or dipped.
Now that material, which
has a name that long,
is being looked at the
moment as causing problems.
And some countries are wanting
to take that off the list
because there's some
associated problems with it.
But at the moment,
all the potatoes
you buy in your
standard supermarkets
are all being dipped or
sprayed in a sprout retardant
to stop this from happening
when they have them in storage.
Now if you go in and
buy your potatoes
and you want your
products labeled,
you try and find a
label that tells you
the chemicals that are involved
in what they dip and spray
these with.
You won't find it.
And this is what
happens with the things
that you buy that
are not organic.
There's a lot of those sort
of products and chemicals
that go into the production
of these things that
don't have to be declared.
And you have no idea what
you're feeding your family
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, so this bed's been
prepared for tomatoes.
As I said, we rotate our beds.
So we'll plant tomatoes
in this bed this year
and this bed will not
see tomatoes for at least
another three years.
And that minimizes our
risk of soil-borne disease.
So this has been prepared over
the winter with composted cow
manure.
And our cow manure is composted
and then spread thickly
across the top,
dug in minimally.
Most of the time, the worms
and the organisms do the work.
So you don't disturb the soil
as much as you possibly can.
So over the winter time, it's
absolutely chockablock full
of worms now.
And we're going to
start planning tomatoes.
Now just as I showed you
before with the piece of pipe
measuring your
planting intervals,
you can also make
up different frames.
This has been made
up for tomatoes.
So therefore, all you
do is you place it
where tomatoes are going.
It's a complete square
so the dimensions
are correct from any angle.
And on each corner, you're
putting in your stakes.
And that's just rough, I'll
do those, again, in a minute.
So you put those in and then
you just turn the frame.
From there, and then
next to your next spot
for your next one, and then
you turn the frame, again.
And you just go all
the way down the bed.
So that automatically
measures your intervals.
So when we're planting,
we'll just dig a hole.
So we're just planting
at the base of the stake.
The stakes go in
first for two reasons.
One, because they give
you your intervals.
And secondly, after the
tomatoes are established
and you put the stakes
in, quite often,
you can damage the taproot.
We put them in to begin
with and then, we've
got a support base
straight away.
You want to just
tease out the bottom.
Now, tomatoes suffer from a
thing called blossom endrot,
which is a cruel disease.
Because your tomatoes
will look beautiful
through the whole
season and it then
before you go to
pick them, they'll
get these big, brown
rotten spots on them.
And they're unusable.
That's because the plant
can't take up calcium.
It usually to do with the
moisture levels in the soil,
irregular watering.
Regularly water your tomatoes
at a regular interval
is the best possible
thing to do.
Because if you just
water them well, go away
for three weeks and the soil
dries out and then water them,
again, that interrupts
their uptake of calcium.
And that can cause
blossom endrot.
And, of course, the soil needs
to have calcium in it, as well.
So this is agricultural gypsum.
And if we use a handful
of agricultural gypsum,
a handful of organic fertilizer,
just move that around a bit,
put your tomato in,
now, a lot of plants
you can't bury them any
lower than the collar
because they rot.
With tomatoes, the deeper you
bury them, the more roots they
will send out.
The more roots they send
out, the bigger, healthier,
more vigorous the plant will be.
And in the end, the
more fruits you'll get.
So always plant your
tomato plant deeper
than the pot level.
So you can put that down
a couple of inches below.
So we bury that in.
We label it.
We water it.
And then we put our mulch on.
And the mulch will end up
going all the way down the bed.
Don't be scared,
again, to lift that
up a couple of inches
above the stem.
And we'll deeply
mulch the whole bed.
So labeling is crucial.
This is just a little
label that comes that we
stick in when we grow the seed.
But because we save all our own
seed in the vegetable garden,
it's crucial to label correctly.
So with the tomatoes or
anything with a stake,
you either use a bigger
tag in the ground
that the birds can't pull out.
Or you use one of the normal
plastic tags with a hole in it
or put a hole in it and
just tie it to the steak.
Or use a little aluminum tags.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But putting a tag on
the wind won't blow away
and the birds won't pull out.
Because there's nothing
worse than going
to save your seed and
you can't find the tag
or remember the name.
Why mulch?
Mulch is critical.
It actually maintains
the moisture in the soil
so you get much
less evaporation.
In fact, in the
spring and the autumn,
if you've had normal
spring and autumn rain,
you may not need
to water at all.
Just because of a
thick layer of mulch
that keeps the
moisture in the soil.
So the other reason is, is
because all the microorganisms
underneath come up and start
breaking down the mulch.
And they start
turning the soil over
and you get a very
healthy soil environment.
If it's just being dried
by the sun, all of this
stays basically dead.
It doesn't retain the
moisture properly.
The roots at the
top won't thrive.
And all the organisms are
moving down further in the soil.
So we keep a nice
thick layer of mulch.
And you have great movement of
all those organisms in the soil
as they break this mulch down.
This is organic
sugarcane mulch, but you
can mulch with anything.
I prefer not to mulch with
straw because it's too light
and it doesn't retain moisture.
And it dries out far too fast.
And the wind blows it away.
Or you can use your own.
You can grind up
your own dry leaves
and sticks in your own mulching
machine and spread that out.
But the thicker it is and the
heart of the material the wood,
you'll have less
moisture retention.
So this actually mats down,
stays moist on the bottom,
and stays like that.
All you need to do is just
water through the hottest period
during summer.
And for the rest of the
time, our sprinklers
won't even come on.
So something we've devised,
which isn't hard for anybody
to set up, is a
hoop system so you
can get your greens in, and your
eggplants, and your capsicums,
and chillies, and
cucumbers in a month or so
earlier by covering them up.
So with this system, you
can use just the water egg
pipe and the PVC pipe.
But we've used very heavy duty.
Our water pipe, it's very thick.
And this is going
to last for years.
And we get blasted
with heavy wind
here so the stuff that's
thin is going to blow over.
This won't move.
So the whole reason for the
system is it's all movable.
We can pull these out and
then they're completely
exposed to the elements.
Or we can just pop in
the hoops and the hoops
are just sitting inside
these PVC pipes, which are
about 60 centimeters, 600 long.
And then just banged
into the soil.
And the whole
system is completely
movable from bed to
bed because each bed
has got the pipes in it.
So here's a hoops
system that was set up
with agricultural cloth.
Now this was originally
designed as a frost cloth.
It protects to about minus
four underneath the cloth.
It has a light shade
factor of around 17%, 18%.
It also creates a microclimate
to increase between four
and six degrees underneath.
It stops wind damage.
Stops hail damage.
And if your crops
are small enough,
you can, in fact,
leave it on all year.
We basically use it to
start the early seedlings.
As I mentioned, the
cucumbers, melons, things
like that that I can't
put out too early because
of the risk of frost.
You can plant them
out a little earlier
now, a month or so earlier,
and just cover them with this.
It's very easy to
handle, very light.
But this is agricultural
cloth, as opposed
to what you might buy
from some manufacturers
and comes from China
is a frost cloth.
It looks a little
bit like tissue.
And that's really only good
for one or two seasons.
This is probably good
for five to seven years.
And it's really not much dearer
so it's a much better product.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Brown onions-- now
this is something
that a lot of gardeners don't
want to tackle because they
think it's too hard.
It's actually one of the
easiest things to grow.
Brown onions actually
store quite a bit longer
than red onions.
So brown onions are a great
option to grow quite a few
and then keep them
over the winter.
But onions are extremely hardy.
These roots can dry out, their
tops can go yellow and break,
and you can still plant them.
And they'll look
dead for a few weeks
and then they'll start
to spring up, again.
So they're very, very hardy.
I'm digging a hole, but all
you need to do is put a trench.
You can put them on
their side like that
and the onion will bring itself
back up to being straight.
So onions is something
worth giving a go.
You may have seen some
on our website or posts
that we've done of our
onions that are this big.
Basically, the secret
to that is enough water.
And you give them enough
water and they swell.
So you want big onions?
Plenty of water.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So with most of our
vegetables, we try and work
on a rotation system.
These, for instance,
capsicums or sweet peppers,
we grow four varieties.
And that's dependent
on varieties
that come a little bit
earlier, ones in the middle,
and ones that come late so
we can extend the season
a little bit more.
And that's exactly the
same for the chilies.
So we're growing old
heirloom varieties,
the ones you don't get in
the shops that are hybrids.
They tend to be
a little bit more
erratic with their fruiting.
But you just can't beat the
flavor of the old heirlooms.
The modern hybrids
just don't compete.
And some of the
more unique ones, we
perhaps only grow one or two of.
And this one's called
Purple Marconi.
It's a sweet pepper.
And it's basically,
almost black.
It's got a beautiful
very dark sheen on it.
It's extremely sweet,
very productive.
And it's a great one
for the home gardener.
So this is our
perpetual spinach.
This is a perennial,
as opposed to an annual
for the other spinach varieties.
This one we can grow all year.
So it's a great backstop for
greens when some of the others
aren't available.
So we actually grow a lot of
exotic and different greens
that go into mixed salads.
And this one's a Bali
spinach from Bali,
both in the red and the green.
And we use the immature
leaves, the sweeter
leaves that aren't so tough.
And especially, the red one that
gives a lot of color to salads.
It's actually part of
the amaranth family,
but we generally don't let
it get any taller than this.
We're just taking the tips
off and the side shoots
and using those in mixed salad.
Another unusual green
we use in mixed salads
is the chrysanthemum.
It's a particular
type of chrysanthemum.
You can buy the seeds.
It comes under the name
of an edible Asian green.
So it's not one that you grow
in the garden for it's flowers,
but you keep this nice and low.
We wouldn't let it get
any bigger than this.
And we're just
taking the tips out.
And they make a great
addition to salads
with quite a unique flavor.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So here's an example of
one of the Asian greens,
which we've let go to seed.
Because apart from
the unusual varieties
that we get from
other collectors
and overseas of old heirloom
varieties and rare varieties
that we grow every
year, the ones
that we want to keep
and continue to grow,
the occasional plant
we let go to seed--
like this.
And when they start to yellow,
we just put them on a tray
for a week or so.
The pods open up, drop the seed,
and we'll use that next year.
So anyone can save seed from
open pollinated heirloom
varieties.
But you can't do that
with your modern hybrids
because they will
start to revert back
to either one of the parents.
Now here's another great
addition to your salad,
both color-wise
and nutritionally,
is beetroot leaves.
And they come in different
colors, in red, in green.
And very nutritious in
a smoothie and a juice.
So it's fine to harvest
about a third of the leaves
on a beetroot and they'll
make exceptionally good juice.
And this is Tuscan kale.
And kale is a staple
ingredient in any smoothie.
And constantly used
in raw food salads
because it's one of the most
nutritional foods you can get.
Now this kale, as opposed
to the Tuscan kale,
which we use for salads
and green juicing,
this is a curly kale.
And the curly kale is a
little bit tougher to eat raw.
So we tend to grow this to
make our dehydrated kale chips.
Because when you cover this in
the capsicum for the flavoring
of the chips, it gets caught
in all the little nooks
and crannies and
holds onto the paste.
And it dehydrates well
and becomes a great chip.
So this is curly kale or
Scotch kale and it's great
for making those chips.
Here's an interesting
little plant
called a Strawberry Spinach.
The leaves are picked and
used in salad, eaten fresh.
And as it matures, there's
little clusters of fruit all up
the stems.
And you can throw them in your
dessert, your fruit salad.
And they're actually
quite pleasant.
The seed for this
is available online.
You can buy it anywhere,
Strawberry Spinach.
Things like watermelons,
rock melons,
cantaloupes, you've got
to specifically grow what
will grow well in your area.
And this, being down
south in Australia
or in the north in
America, it's colder.
So we don't have the
same amount of warm days.
So you've got to
get varieties which
are specific to your area.
This is a very old heirloom
from the Navajo Indians.
And it's actually called
Navajo Winter Melon.
It's one of the best,
for once it's cut,
it will store actually
for a month or two.
Whereas, a lot of
the other watermelons
don't store that well.
It ripens 90, 95 days.
It's a great producer.
We've probably got 25 melons
off about 10 plants off this one
this season.
Quite often, the varieties
that are grown down here
are things like sugar
baby and things like that.
They're the ones that are
most readily available.
I've had no success
with those at all.
They're slow to crop.
They grow too small.
They split when it rains.
You want to get a hold of some
of these really good heirloom
varieties, which are
specifically good for the area
that you live in.
Ones like this.
And you just got to go
online and do your research.
You notice this one's more of
a pink color, it's still ripe.
It doesn't actually go bright
red, it stays a pink color.
One of the questions we get
asked the most about melons
is that the home gardener
doesn't know when to pick them.
Now there's actually
four indicators
that when a melon is ready.
Because if you pick
them too early,
they won't ripen any
further and they're no good.
And if you pick
them too late, they
get all dry and flowery inside.
So I'll just show you.
The first indicator--
and I do these in order--
at the end of every
stem, where it
joins the main
stem from the fruit
stem to the main stem
right at the axle,
there is a small, what
we call, a spoon leaf--
a small curled in leaf.
Then we have a tendril right
almost at the same point.
At the first leaf axle after
the stem is a curly tendril.
So the first thing
we look for is
when that's green and not
brown, it's not ready.
For it to be ripe, that needs
to be completely shriveled up
or even dropped off.
The tendril is the second
thing I'll look at.
If that tendril is all
dried up, completely brown,
and that's gone.
The third thing at the
bottom of a ripe one,
which I'll show you
in a minute, will
have a yellow, not a white, but
a yellow or discolored patch
at the bottom.
They start going pale, then
cream, and then yellow.
When that patch is yellow,
that indicates that it's ripe.
And also, by tapping it.
That is a method,
though, that you'd
have to get used to after
growing them awhile.
Because there's a certain
sound and a vibration
that a melon gives
off when it's ready.
So here's the indicators here.
Here's your spoon leaf,
all dried up, shriveled up.
And here's your tendril,
all dried, curled up.
We have a particular
vibration in there.
And there's a yellow
patch on the bottom.
And with all three of
those things in play,
this melons ripe, ready to pick.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Some people pick
their pumpkins early.
If you do that, you're
going to get something hard.
That's something
that doesn't have
the correct amount of flavor.
And remember, pumpkins will
actually mature and cure
in a space of time
of about a month.
So if you pick these, store
them for about a month,
and they will improve
on their flavor
than what they do when
they're actually picked fresh.
One point, though, if you're
going to pick them early, make
sure that the stem is completely
browned off and gone old corky
and brown so there's no longer
any nutrient going to it.
And when that's
completely died off,
make sure you pick enough stem
on it right back to the vine.
And that will improve
its storing quality.
If you take the stem off and
it snaps off at the pumpkin,
you're more likely
to induce some rot.
I like to leave mine right
until the vines are looking
pretty well dead or died off.
But one thing you
face when you do that
is that you can
get them sunburnt.
And if you see--
this, say, you've got a
very hot day coming up
and they're not protected,
especially later
on in the year, some
of these exposed
areas on very, very
hot days and high UV,
these will actually get burnt.
Now what happens there is this
will be the first patch to rot.
And it won't store well at all.
And it will get soft
and squishy if it's left
and that's where
you're rot will set in.
So I use little
squares of shade cloth.
Doesn't matter what color--
green, black, white.
And if you get them and get one
piece that'll go over the two
or just cover them
like that, and that
will protect all your pumpkins
from getting sunburnt.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we're ready to harvest
these potatoes we planted.
And just one point
with these potatoes
is that a lot of
people say you have
to heal up around the potatoes
because the ones that come up
from the top get the sunlight
on them and they go green.
And that's true.
And that's a very
effective way of doing it.
But the other way of doing
it is as your potatoes grow,
you just put more
mulch on top of them.
And that keeps all the
potatoes with a cover on them
and they never go green.
So there's no green at
all on any of these.
And these ones are the ones that
are growing just on the surface
because there's always
plenty of mulch.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, these brown onions
are ready to harvest.
And this is a variety
we've grown this year
called Sweet Dominica.
And you can tell when an
onion is ready to harvest
because it will naturally
bend and drop the green over.
And then once it does that,
it's ready to harvest.
Now that's an onion.
So we are growing both red
onions and the brown onions.
Once these are
all up, we'll just
leave them on the surface to
dry out for a couple of days.
And make sure they are dry
before you try and store them.
Because if it's been raining
and the skins are wet,
they'll only rot in storage.
So make sure that they dry out
completely with some warm air
before you put them in a dark
room or in a bag for storage.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So now in late
autumn, when we've
got a lot of our summer
crop still finishing up--
the tomatoes are
finished, pumpkins
are finishing up,
zucchinis, cucumber, peppers
is slowing down--
this is the time now
where we redo our beds.
We rip out the old ones.
We compost the material.
And we're going to dig
in composted cow manure,
our compost that we've made.
We dig in and we prepare the
beds for our spring planting.
The only exception
to that is some crops
that we will overwinter,
which is some of the spinach
and the perpetual spinach, the
rainbow chard, silver beet,
and kale.
So our juicing grains.
We're preparing to
plant some more now,
but we still have some
very vigorous bushes
growing at the moment so
they'll be overwintered.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We'll just feed those.
We'll mulch them.
We'll overwinter
them and we'll plant
some new crops for spring.
So here we are in the pumpkin
patch, the end of autumn.
The vines are dying off.
And normally, I
wouldn't pick them,
but if the stems
are woody and hard
and there's no sap flow
anymore, you can pick them off.
We generally leave ours till
the vines die right off.
And then, they left out
with a little bit of sun
and a little bit of cold
nights for them to cure.
And when they've
cured, they then
go in a shed that's
got plenty of airflow,
just to make sure they've got
no excess moisture in them
for about a month.
And then they get stored
in a dark storeroom.
And depending on the variety,
can last between three or four
months right up to 12 months.
If you were to
pick days and then
store them for two
months, what happens
is the starches turn into sugar.
So a pumpkin that's been
stored for a month or two
is actually sweeter than
one straight off the vine.
So the reason why we've put the
black fence around all our beds
at here is twofold.
One, because we've got a rabbit
problem, a big rabbit problem.
And kangaroos.
And the second, most important,
is this is a windbreak cloth.
We get gusts of wind up
here on the unprotected side
of the mountain from the
west and from the north.
And the windbreak cloth
actually breaks the wind down,
pushes it through the
fence, and disperses it
instead of getting that gust.
So those are the two reasons
why we put up the fence.
So what we're doing
in this bed, we
want to have a look
at this plant here.
It's actually, a Peruvian
root vegetable called yacon.
It's actually one of
the sunflower family.
But they're so sweet that
they're eaten raw in salads
or you can stir fry them,
if you wish, or steam them.
But they are so sweet that
they called ground apple
because that's what
they taste like.
And just like the
pumpkins, they actually
prefer once you've dogged
them up to leave them out
in the sun for a few days.
And that actually helps
turn the starch into sugar
so they get sweeter.
We'll have a look.
So as we can see, it's
all pushed up here.
The ground's bulging.
Starts off with one small
tuber with an eye on it
and we end up with a whole
big bucket full of tubers.
As you can see, they're
absolutely everywhere.
Now, we generally wait
for all the foliage
to die off before we pick them,
but we'll just take one off
and we'll have a look.
We actually store ours in
damp sand, bricklayer sand.
And we just put
them in a bucket,
put the sand around
them and they
last for quite a few
months like that.
So what you do is once
you've taken the skin off,
you do this with a
vegetable peeler.
This part here is basically,
just like an apple.
Very, very sweet.
It's beautiful.
Here in the asparagus patch,
this time of the year--
late autumn, the
start of winter--
the foliage is all going yellow.
And we'll wait for that
to completely go yellow.
Then we'll remove
that, we'll compost it.
We'll put in another
load of fresh compost.
We'll cover that, again,
with sugarcane mulch.
And we'll wait till spring and
the shoots start coming up.
Now this is actually,
a second year crop.
When it comes up this spring,
it'll be its third year.
And we'll start to harvest it.
The reason why you don't
harvest them prior to that
is because the plants
are needing this foliage
to take in all the
nutrients and from the sun
and grow the roots to
being big healthy roots.
If you start taking
off the asparagus
shoots as they come
up, there isn't
anything to absorb those
nutrients back into the ground.
So it's a good idea to leave
them for the first two years
before your harvest.
And then the third
year, harvest sparingly.
And then after that, you're OK
Previously, we'd probably
only take about 50%
of the crop, the rest of
the foliage we leave on.
A well-maintained and
well-looked after asparagus
patch will see you with
plenty of asparagus
for at least 20 years.
When we're talking about
health, both our health
and the health of the soil,
it all comes down to biology.
And we'll just briefly talk
about biology of the soil.
Just 1 teaspoon, 5 grams
of healthy organic soil
can hold over 1 billion
bacteria, over 5 million fungi,
thousands of protozoa, and
many, many beneficial nematodes.
That all combine to
make the soil food web.
The soil food web is
the critical interaction
between all of those
elements in the soil that
create the environment
that protects and nourishes
the plants naturally.
As far as we're concerned,
we're told all the time
about the benefits of
beneficial bacteria in our gut.
And that bacteria that we
rely on for our own health
and to sustain our
own immune system
feeds on the cellulose
fiber from plant material.
And what happens in our everyday
life of eating foods packaged,
canned, cooked in
an unhealthy way,
processed, and other
things that we're not
supposed to be eating.
Impacted by the water we
drink because the water
we have through our mains
water system is treated.
And it's treated for
one reason and that's
the kill bacteria in the water.
So when we ingest that water,
it does exactly the same to us.
And it kills
billions and billions
of beneficial bacteria.
So we find ourselves depleted.
So that need is fulfilled
by companies producing
in laboratories, beneficial
bacteria of one or two strains,
usually grown on dairy products.
It doesn't do the same thing
as a balanced diet when we're
provided and feeding millions
of beneficial bacteria
on a holistic scope, instead
of just swallowing one or two
strains of bacteria.
And when we're taking in only
one or two strains of bacteria
instead of the whole spectrum,
that's not a holistic approach.
So the problem is that
standard agricultural
and conventional farming
practices have not
looked after the soil.
So what we have
are practices which
come along before they plant.
They cover and
fumigate the soil which
kills everything living in it.
And we're starting
from a position of soil
that is no longer living.
So what happens is
we plant the plant.
We feed the plant.
We feed it on three
main nutrients,
a NPK, so-called,
balanced fertilizer.
When, in fact, the soil
when it's in its own balance
provides over 50
nutrients to the plants.
But we artificially
feed them with three
to get ongoing growth, to
get some root structure,
and to get production of fruit.
What happens when
we only have three
is that we don't have the
other elements to provide
the plant with enough
nutrients naturally
to build its own immune system.
So therefore, it
can't fight disease.
It can't fight off
pest and insect attack.
And what happens then is that
we have to treat them, again,
with artificial chemicals for
the funguses, for the insects,
and for all the
problems that we have
that the soil can
then not cope with.
So once the populations of
beneficial bacteria and fungi
are affected, the soil structure
is dramatically depleted.
As the soil structure
collapses, the poor spices
get smaller and the
soil begins to compact.
In turn, the air exchange
and the moisture availability
to the roots is
greatly declined.
And this then causes
anaerobic conditions,
in which bad bacteria
and disease can flourish.
Bacteria live in
water, which means
they live in the moist membrane
surrounding the soil particles.
Most beneficial
bacteria require oxygen
and they're called
aerobic bacteria.
The bacteria that don't
require oxygen, the bad ones,
are called anaerobic bacteria.
So we can not only have
problems with poor soil moisture
content, both not
getting enough,
but we can also have a
problem with the structure
of the soil is so poor
that water will sit there
and won't drain.
That causes another problem,
whereas the excess moisture
forces out the
oxygen. And again,
promotes the growth
of anaerobic bacteria.
Mycorrhizal fungi have
a symbiotic relationship
with the soil.
And a symbiotic
relationship is simply,
a relationship that benefits the
plant and benefits the fungi.
So the mycorrhizal fungi
live partly in the soil
and partly on the little hairs
on the roots of the plant.
And between the whole system,
it talks to each other about
what's required,
what's needed, what's
in the soil, what
the plant can use.
The fungi helps assist
the uptake of nutrients
from the soil to the plant.
And in return, the plant feeds
the fungi with carbohydrates.
One of the main nutrients
we use as home gardeners
or the commercial farmers use is
nitrogen. The problem with that
is when we don't
grow holistically,
when we don't grow organically,
nitrogen is a problem.
It locks up in the soil.
The truth is there is
no nitrogen deficiency
in healthy soil at all.
You do not need to add
nitrogen. And, in fact,
the more you throw on there,
which is chemical nitrogen,
the more it gets fixed in
the soil and doesn't release.
Natural nitrogen is broken
down and fed to plants
through things like
mycorrhizal fungi.
The problem when you don't
have the biology in the soil
is that nitrogen sits
there, it gets locked up.
And a lot of it gets
released into the atmosphere,
causing the greenhouse effect.
And we keep pouring more and
more on because the plants
aren't getting it.
Not because it's
not in the soil,
but because we don't
have the biology
to work that
symbiotic relationship
with natural nitrogen,
natural uptake
through natural
organisms in the soil.
In fact, the relationship
that the mycorrhizal fungi has
with plants is similar to ours.
Both fungi and ourselves, we
don't produce any chlorophyll.
We need it, but we
don't produce it.
Plants produce that
through the sun
through photosynthesis,
that is their energy source.
We, just like the fungi,
require carbohydrates, an energy
source.
And this is where the plants
and the mycorrhizal fungi
work together in that
symbiotic relationship.
And what is, indeed,
intended for us
in nature's grand
plan for everything
is that we also
work symbolically
with plants to get what we
require in the way of energy.
So the problem that we
have with modern farming
is we've taken on the
idea that we can actually
improve on nature.
That what's been happening
for billions of years on Earth
in a system that is foolproof--
it works itself, it
feeds everything itself,
it resolves it issues itself--
and yet, we've come
along with a quick fix
to throw chemicals on the
ground, one or two chemicals,
to get a little pushing growth
and a little bit of this
and a little bit of that.
The problem is without
that holistic approach,
it eventually ends
up with problems.
So we go back to watching how
nature does it in the bush,
in the jungle,
out in the fields.
It looks after itself.
So all we do is feed the
soil with what is natural.
And we use grass
clippings, leaf mold,
composted materials like
sticks, vegetable scraps, animal
manures.
They all go in a pile.
It's the bacteria that
heats it up, breaks it down.
You got a massive diversity
of bacteria and fungi
in those compost piles.
The pathogens have
been killed by the heat
so they're no longer dangerous.
The weed seeds have
been killed by the heat
so all you have is this
perfectly constructed
by nature plant food.
It feeds the soil.
The soil feeds the plant.
And everything
works automatically,
the way nature intended.
The other point is
that when you are
feeding your soils with
the best material you can,
which is compost--
whether that's with grass
clippings, vegetable peels--
whatever you've
got, it's all great.
It's all going to heat
up with the bacteria.
It's all going to break down.
It is all fantastic
food for your soil.
But the key to real
health is diversity.
So if you do go into the forest
and you turn over some topsoil
and you see that those white
fungal spores that are growing,
you take a handful of
that, you bring it back,
you put it in your
compost pile, now
millions of diverse varieties
of bacteria and fungi
that you didn't have
in your compost pile
will now breed in
your compost pile.
So by bringing
from other sources,
material into your compost
pile is a great thing.
It builds diversity.
And in the end, the
effect is the more,
the merrier as far as beneficial
bacterial mycorrhizal fungi
goes.
So you're actually producing
a more richer, diverse product
that feeds your soil better.
Another thing you can
do with those compost
is instead of putting
it on the soil
and letting it
break down slowly,
there is another
way of increasing
the beneficial bacteria
of mycorrhizal fungi
at a phenomenal rate.
And that is with what
we call compost tea.
Now, I suggest that you
look up compost tea,
there are lots of
different recipes.
In fact, one day soon, I hope
to put one up on our web page.
But what that is, is
we're taking compost,
we're putting it in a bag.
We're putting it in
a vat or a container
with oxygen and
oxygen is the key.
We're bubbling that solution
full of clean water, not tap
water or you'll actually
kill the bacteria.
So tank water, or rain
water, or tap water
that has been gassed
off, which means
the chlorine and the
chemicals are gassed off
by bubbling them for 24 hours.
So that gets rid
of the chemicals
if you have to use tap water.
And what you do is
24 hours, 30 hours,
depending on the temperature--
a little bit longer in cooler
temperatures, a little
bit shorter in warmer
temperatures--
the ideal is somewhere around
20 to 24 degrees is fantastic.
But you can do it
at any time, it just
takes longer in the cold,
shorter time in the heat.
And you're bubbling this
brew for that length of time.
And what happens is in the light
paint strainer bag, one that
has a very, very small micron
so that the soil doesn't all
get washed out, it allows
the bacteria and the fungi
to come through the
bag into the solution.
Bubbles with the
oxygen. And they
are reproducing
billions and billions
at a phenomenal hourly rate.
So what you have then at the
end is a product, a tea, which
you can spray on your foliage.
It protects the foliage,
the plant from bad bacteria.
It protects it
from mold, fungus.
It's a great inoculate for both
for the plant and for the soil.
So it feeds and inoculates,
both at the same time.
If you'd like to get
into that research
a little bit on
compost tea and you
will find immediate
results with compost tea,
and that just aids the whole
system of organic gardening.
So you've got your slow
composting process,
where the soil bacteria pulling
down the nutrients over time
as it breaks down
on the soil surface.
Plus, you're immediately
feeding and inoculating
with something like compost tea.
Give that a go.